Publish spec to master (#78)
openconfig/gribi: doc/specification.md

# gRIBI: gRPC Routing Information Base Interface

> **Contributors:** {robjs,nflath,xiaowa}@google.com, {nandan,prakash}@arista.com \

Author: yes! how did I forgot to update the list. will do!

> **Contributors:** {robjs,nflath,xiaowa}@google.com, {nandan,prakash}@arista.com \

Reviewer: great, thanks :-)

for gRIBI service.

## 4.1 `Modify` RPC

The `Modify` RPC is a bidirectional streaming RPC for clients to modify the
device's RIB. A client sends `ModifyRequest` messages that contains a set of
`AFTOperation` messages to the device. The device processes the received
requests and responds them asynchronously.

### 4.1.1 Client-Server Session Negotiation

A gRIBI client is identified by `Modify` RPC sessions, i.e., if a session drops
and reconnect with the same `election_id` value, it will be considered as
another client.

Before a client starts sending `AFTOperation` messages, it should specify the
desired parameters for the session:

*   Redundancy Mode - defined in [4.1.4](#414-redundancy-mode)
*   Persistent Mode - defined in [4.1.5](#415-persistence-modes)
*   Acknowledge Mode - defined in [4.1.6](#416-acknowledge-mode)

A client starts the negotiation process by sending the first `ModifyRequest`
message with only `params` populated. `params` MUST NOT be sent more than once
during the lifetime of the RPC session. All clients MUST send the same values of

> all the attributes of `params`. If the device can process and support the

Reviewer: Adding a separate suggestion to fix grammar+markdown issue I introduced in my suggestion.

*   `ALL_PRIMARY`: The device accepts AFT operations from all clients.

#### 4.1.4.1 Client Election In `SINGLE_PRIMARY`

gRIBI server does not participate in the election process, rather it consumes
the election result. Election result is reflected in the
`ModifyRequest.election_id` sent by clients. gRIBI server treats the client of
the highest election ID as the primary client.

When a client's election ID changed, the client should send a `ModifyRequest`
with only the `ModifyRequest.election_id` populated. The device should respond
with a `ModifyResponse` that has only the `election_id` field populated. The
`ModifyResponse.election_id` by the server should be the highest election ID
that the device has learnt from any client.

If the `ModifyRequest.election_id` sent by a client matches the previous highest
value, the newer client is considered primary. This allows for a client to
reconnect without an external election having taken place. It is gRIBI clients'
responsibility to avoid more than one `Modify` RPC sessions that are of the same
highest Election ID, i.e., "dual-primary" situation in a `SINGLE_PRIMARY` mode.

#### 4.1.4.2 New Leader Election In `SINGLE_PRIMARY`

> Switching to a new leader client occurs when a new client connects with

Reviewer: Should we standardise on a single term for the leader/primary client? I think primary is fine (but I think we chose leader when we did an inclusive language review).

Reviewer: Sounds great :-)

[section 2](#2-data-model)) and its server acknowledged programming status
(`rib_status` and `fib_status`). "server acknowledged programming status"
represents the `AFTResult` at the time of the response being sent to the client
(regardless if sending the response failed).

*   `rib_status` indicates the programming status of the gRIBI entry in RIB. The
    value should be either `PROGRAMMED` or `NOT_PROGRAMMED`.
*   `fib_status` indicates the programming status of the gRIBI entry in FIB.
    *   When the session parameter is `ack_type` = `RIB_ACK`, it's optional for
        the device to keep track of FIB programming status of each gRIBI entry.
        Therefore, this field MAY be set to `UNAVAILABLE`.
    *   When the session parameter is `ack_type` = `RIB_AND_FIB_ACK`, the value
        should be either `PROGRAMMED` or `NOT_PROGRAMMED`.

If the specified network instances have no installed gRIBI objects, the device
should return an empty list of `AFTEntry` and then close the RPC with the
generic gRPC [`Status.code`][gRPC status code] set to `OK`.

## 4.3 `Flush` RPC

The `Flush` RPC is an unary RPC for clients to remove gRIBI entries from a

> device. A client sends a `FlushRequest` message specifying the target network

Reviewer: ```suggestion
device in bulk. A client sends a `FlushRequest` message specifying the target network
```

result.

The `Flush` RPC can be used in some emergency process to get the device out of
undesirable routing state, therefore:

*   This RPC provides a low complexity method to remove all gRIBI entries in
    specified network instance.
*   This RPC allows non primary client (in `SINGLE_PRIMARY` mode) to remove all
    gRIBI entries in specified network instance.

### 4.3.1 `FlushRequest` Message

A `FlushRequest` message MUST have the `network_instance` populated by client.

*   If `network_instance` is nil or `network_instance.name` is an empty string,
    the device should reject the request with gRPC error
    [`Status.code`][gRPC status code] set to `INVALID_ARGUMENT`. The
    `Status.details` should contain `FlushResponseError` message with `reason`
    set to `INVALID_NETWORK_INSTANCE`.
*   If the specified network instance does not exist, the device should reject
    the request with gRPC error [`Status.code`][gRPC status code] set to
    `INVALID_ARGUMENT`. The `Status.details` should contain `FlushResponseError`
    message with `reason` set to `NO_SUCH_NETWORK_INSTANCE`.

#### 4.3.1.1 `election` In `FlushRequest` Message

> Only when the client-server is in `SINGLE_PRIMARY` mode (defined in

Reviewer: Suggest switching this sentence's form around "The client MUST populate the `election` field when the server is in `SINGLE_PRIMARY` mode". I think it specifically the *server* that we need to care about here, because there might be zero active clients at the time of the flush, and I think this is still required.

# gRIBI: gRPC Routing Information Base Interface

**Editors:** {xiaowa, nflath, robjs}@google.com \
**Contributors:** {nandan,prakash}@arista.com, {ashp, amilliso}@cisco.com,
{vkestur}@juniper.net, {adam.1.simpson}@nokia.com \
**Version**: 1.0.0 \

> **Last Update**: 2022-10-2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Last Update**: 2022-10-05
```

    *   The device is not required to maintain gRIBI objects in the FIB or RIB.
    *   New `Get`([4.2](#42-get-rpc)) or `Flush`([4.3](#43-flush-rpc)) should
        return corresponding errors (because the VRF is no longer there)
    *   When the VRF is added back, the server is not required to restore all
        the gRIBI objects without an explicit client request.
    *   Since these external actions (e.g., configuration changes) can impact
        whether a particular entry is being used by the server, the client MAY
        monitor the state of the selected entries via subscribing to the
        Abstract Forwarding Table (AFT) information via gNMI Subscribe.

### 4.1.8 gRIBI Route Preference

A device might learn routing information of the same destination from different
protocols (e.g., static route, gRIBI, OSPF, BGP, etc.), and prefer one over the
others. The preference is normally indicated by different values (often known as
Administrative Distance or Route Preference) in a network device OS. The values
are locally significant to different device OS.

This spec does not enforce the exact value that a device OS should assign to

> gRIBI protocol,but the value MUST be configurable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gRIBI protocol, but the value MUST be configurable.
```

## 4.1 `Modify` RPC

The `Modify` RPC is a bidirectional streaming RPC for clients to modify the
device's RIB. A client sends `ModifyRequest` messages that contain a set of
`AFTOperation` messages to the device. The device processes the received
requests and responds to them asynchronously.

### 4.1.1 Client-Server Session Negotiation

A gRIBI client is identified by `Modify` RPC streams, i.e., if an RPC drops or
is cancelled and reconnects with the same `election_id` value, it will be
considered as another client.

Before a client starts sending `AFTOperation` messages, it should specify the
desired parameters for the session:

*   Redundancy Mode - defined in [4.1.4](#414-redundancy-mode)
*   Persistence Mode - defined in [4.1.5](#415-persistence-modes)
*   Acknowledgement Mode - defined in [4.1.6](#416-acknowledge-mode)

A client starts the negotiation process by sending the first `ModifyRequest`
message with only `params` populated. `params` MUST NOT be sent more than once
during the lifetime of the RPC session.

Since clients that are programming the same server are expected to implement
common modes of operation, servers are not required to support all combinations.

> Particularly, for the parameters of the `params (i.e., persistence, election and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Particularly, for the parameters described in `params` (i.e., persistence, election and
```

This was a markdown error I introduced in my previous suggestion.

    *   The device is not required to maintain gRIBI objects in the FIB or RIB.
    *   New `Get`([4.2](#42-get-rpc)) or `Flush`([4.3](#43-flush-rpc)) should
        return corresponding errors (because the VRF is no longer there)
    *   When the VRF is added back, the server is not required to restore all
        the gRIBI objects without an explicit client request.
    *   Since these external actions (e.g., configuration changes) can impact
        whether a particular entry is being used by the server, the client MAY
        monitor the state of the selected entries via subscribing to the
        Abstract Forwarding Table (AFT) information via gNMI Subscribe.

### 4.1.8 gRIBI Route Preference

A device might learn routing information of the same destination from different
protocols (e.g., static route, gRIBI, OSPF, BGP, etc.), and prefer one over the
others. The preference is often configurable and indicated by different values
(often known as Administrative Distance or Route Preference) in a network device
OS. The values are locally significant to different device OS.

This spec does not enforce the exact value that a device OS should assign to

> gRIBI protocol. However, the value MUST be configurable or by default between

Reviewer: Is this quite right? I think this changed meaning in this edit. Particularly, my interpretation of the previous intent was it:

 * MUST default to between static and everything else.
 * MAY be configurable

whereas now we say that it:

 * MUST be configurable
 * OR/MAY have a value between static and everything else

I prefer the former to the latter.

Author: Sorry, forgot to call out this edit (and this is the only edit that changed meaning). I can't not tell for sure which one is better. 

IMHO`MUST default to between static and everything else.` + `MAYBE configurable` sounds too strong to me that excludes the future possibility from other protocols. 

Current wording is `MUST be configurable` **OR** `default to between static and everything else` might be better because: 
* pretty much all vendors support configurable route preference for different protocols anyway. 
* more flexible to other possible routing protocols in the future.

Thoughts?

Reviewer: In the latter case, I think just saying it `MUST be configurable` sounds best since this is a strict super-set of the other behaviour of being less-preferable-than-static-more-preferable-than-everything-else. The cost that comes with is obviously having the implementation for the configurability, and needing to have the configuration explicitly specify the preference. Those seem reasonable to me.

Author: I"m ok with that. Updated. Thanks!
